docs/README.md, before:

CNVScope
================
James Dalgleish
November 26, 2018

CNVScope is a visualization toolkit for seeing copy number data in a
relationship fashion, both utilizing tools that find regions of interest
(much like domains in Hi-C terminology), visualize the relationships in
vibrant color (blue for negative association, red for positive), and
integrates several different relevant types of data (RNASeq, sample
information, Cancer Gene Census data, and structural variants).
Structural variants like rearrangements can be thought of as
interactions between genomic regions, which is why it makes sense to
build GenomicInteractions objects and from this, interaction matrices
that can be easily visualized.

\#Installation To install, it is best to install the github version
(this is the most updated) and the CNVScopePublicData package (the data
package is fairly large, so be patient while it installs). The next line
will have you up and running\!

``` r
remotes::install_github("jamesdalg/CNVScope")
CNVScope::runCNVScopeLocal()
```

\#App

The app includes several components and starts with a customizable
control panel. As an example, we’ll search for TERT and TP53.
![tert-tp53 control panel example](./control_panel_demo.gif)

Doing it this way creates a zoomed in plot of the copy number
relationships between the chromosomes containing TERT (chromosome 5) and
TP53 (chromosome 17), zoomed into the specific region for those
particular genes (as denoted in the search box). For many regions, we
can rely on the tooltip for genes, but this region is particularly gene
dense and it’s best to simply click on the region of interest. The row
and column genes are searchable here and will aid us to understand that
we’re in the right place. ![tert-tp53 zoomed with
click](./zoomed_tp53_tert.gif)

Clicking on the cancer gene census tab will lead us to the genes that
are found within the cancer gene census, (a curated list of cancer
genes)\[<https://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/census>\]. Corresponding info
suggests what cancers associated with the gene, mechanism of action (if
known), and tissue types.

The sample level information will lead us to a series of plots
(histogram, scatter, a colored linear regression plot) that will get at
the underlying data behind the negative log p-value, and help us detect
outliers, look at clusterings of samples, and see if the regression
p-value is driven by a variety of points from different cancer types
rather than just an outlier or a group of outliers. All the plots are
zoomable and a slider for opacity has been provided for the histogram to
more clearly see distributions that might tightly overlap.

Expression data is provided for neuroblastoma, sorting the most variable
genes to the top for the specific set of chromosomal regions for the
clicked point.

Finally, a whole genome view is provided to give the viewer a sense of
the complexity and domains of the neuroblastoma interactome and to
encourage further exploration of subpoints. The slider allows the user
to select the saturation limit and thereby see domains that otherwise
would be invisible due to the high values on the diagonal.

![tert-tp53 walkthrough](./tp53_tert_walkthrough.gif)

\#Package

The package focuses on methods of analyzing these matrices and
constructing components for app use. See the following vignettes for
more information (also available on command line):

[Creating the Input matrix from public
data](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/CNVScope/vignettes/create_input_matrix.html)

[Linear
Regression/Postprocess](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/CNVScope/vignettes/create_output_matrix.html)

\#Video Tutorial

For a complete video tutorial (12 minutes in length), [click
here](cnvscope_tutorial.mp4).

<iframe src="blca3d.html">

</iframe>

Commit message:

Added a blip about the additional examples vignette.

docs/README.md, after:

CNVScope
================
James Dalgleish
November 26, 2018

CNVScope is a visualization toolkit for seeing copy number data in a
relationship fashion, both utilizing tools that find regions of interest
(much like domains in Hi-C terminology), visualize the relationships in
vibrant color (blue for negative association, red for positive), and
integrates several different relevant types of data (RNASeq, sample
information, Cancer Gene Census data, and structural variants).
Structural variants like rearrangements can be thought of as
interactions between genomic regions, which is why it makes sense to
build GenomicInteractions objects and from this, interaction matrices
that can be easily visualized.

\#Installation To install, it is best to install the github version
(this is the most updated) and the CNVScopePublicData package (the data
package is fairly large, so be patient while it installs). The next line
will have you up and running\!

``` r
remotes::install_github("jamesdalg/CNVScope")
CNVScope::runCNVScopeLocal()
```

\#App

The app includes several components and starts with a customizable
control panel. As an example, we’ll search for TERT and TP53.
![tert-tp53 control panel example](./control_panel_demo.gif)

Doing it this way creates a zoomed in plot of the copy number
relationships between the chromosomes containing TERT (chromosome 5) and
TP53 (chromosome 17), zoomed into the specific region for those
particular genes (as denoted in the search box). For many regions, we
can rely on the tooltip for genes, but this region is particularly gene
dense and it’s best to simply click on the region of interest. The row
and column genes are searchable here and will aid us to understand that
we’re in the right place. ![tert-tp53 zoomed with
click](./zoomed_tp53_tert.gif)

Clicking on the cancer gene census tab will lead us to the genes that
are found within the cancer gene census, (a curated list of cancer
genes)\[<https://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/census>\]. Corresponding info
suggests what cancers associated with the gene, mechanism of action (if
known), and tissue types.

The sample level information will lead us to a series of plots
(histogram, scatter, a colored linear regression plot) that will get at
the underlying data behind the negative log p-value, and help us detect
outliers, look at clusterings of samples, and see if the regression
p-value is driven by a variety of points from different cancer types
rather than just an outlier or a group of outliers. All the plots are
zoomable and a slider for opacity has been provided for the histogram to
more clearly see distributions that might tightly overlap.

Expression data is provided for neuroblastoma, sorting the most variable
genes to the top for the specific set of chromosomal regions for the
clicked point.

Finally, a whole genome view is provided to give the viewer a sense of
the complexity and domains of the neuroblastoma interactome and to
encourage further exploration of subpoints. The slider allows the user
to select the saturation limit and thereby see domains that otherwise
would be invisible due to the high values on the diagonal.

![tert-tp53 walkthrough](./tp53_tert_walkthrough.gif)

\#Package

The package focuses on methods of analyzing these matrices and
constructing components for app use. See the following vignettes for
more information (also available on command line):

[Creating the Input matrix from public
data](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/CNVScope/vignettes/create_input_matrix.html)

[Linear
Regression/Postprocess](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/CNVScope/vignettes/create_output_matrix.html)

\#Video Tutorial

For a complete video tutorial (16 minutes in length), [click
here](cnvscope_tutorial.mp4).

\#Additional Examples

Feel free to look at the additional examples vignette. We have several
GDC datasets that demonstrate that our package is a versatile toolkit
that is useful for NBL, as well as SKCM (Skin Cancer), BLCA (bladder
cancer), AML (Acute Myleoid Leukemia), and PRAD (Prostate Cancer). We
also demonstrate our copy number relationship weighting function as well
as contour and 3D representations. An example is detailed below. [Click
here for an interactive version.](./blca3d.html)

![3D BLCA, chromosome 17](./blca_3D.png)
